Although the designs, which German philosophers conceived and German
statesmen and strategists spent thirty years in perfecting, for the
conquest of our Cape territories and the creation of a Greater Germany
extending from the Mediterranean to Table Bay, are best illustrated and
exposed by the defiantly defensive policy they pursued in South-West
Africa, the rise, development and fall of the German Colonial Empire is
more completely epitomised in the chapter dealing with the Cameroons.

The establishment of the German East African protectorate forms a story
that is intensely interesting, inasmuch as it reveals the duplicity of
Teutonic methods in their relations with native races, European rivals
and their own agents. Bismarck, the last barbarian of genius, repudiated
Dr. Karl Peters when, equipped with private capital and acting on his
own initiative, he was acquiring in the hinterland of Zanzibar a
well-watered, fertile province equal in extent to South Germany, and
obtaining from the Sultan the concession for the ports of Dar-es-Salaam
and Pangani. It was necessary in 1884 for Germany to assure England that
the Imperial Government had no intention of securing possessions in a
region which was admittedly within Britain’s sphere of influence, and
Bismarck pursued Dr. Peters to Africa with an official intimation that
the State would not grant him protection for the lives of his party, or
for any possessions he might acquire opposite Zanzibar. But when the
intrepid Teuton, as the representative of the German East Africa
Company, had accomplished the spade work and returned to Berlin, the
Government continued negotiations with the Sultan through their
Consul-General at Zanzibar. The formal ratification of the treaties made
in the name of the Company, was followed by a revolt of the Arabs, and
when the Company’s representatives had been allowed to be murdered or
put to flight, Bismarck was able to declare that the situation that had
arisen was beyond the control of private enterprise, and an expedition,
under Major von Wissman, was accordingly despatched to East Africa to
suppress the slave traffic which still flourished in that region. For
the furtherance of such a humane and civilising purpose, the
co-operation of the British fleet was readily enlisted, and with this
support and the energetic measures taken by von Wissman’s army of
ex-British native soldiers, the disaffected populace was eventually
“pacified,” even if the slave traffic was not suppressed. The Company’s
claims to the territorial concessions granted under the treaties having
been made good--Great Britain could not, in politeness, protest against
the acquisition of Mount Kilimanjaro, since the amiable Kaiser had
expressed a sentimental wish that the highest peak in Africa might be
within the sphere of German _kultur_!--the Reichstag voted ten and a
half million marks for the maintenance and development of these newly
acquired territories. Then, and not until then, did England realise that
with the connivance of Downing Street and the assistance of British
men-of-war, this rich and important territory, with an area of 384,000
square miles, had become a Protectorate of Germany. Having duped
England, punished the natives, and established their rule, it was only
necessary to recall Dr. Peters and hand him over to the tender mercies
of his official and political enemies, to make this chapter of the
history of German empire building characteristic in its completeness.

What Germany succeeded in doing in East Africa after years of intrigue
and deceit, and the expenditure of much blood and money, she
accomplished in the acquisition of Togoland with a minimum of cost or
trouble. Dr. Nachtigal, in the capacity of German Trade Commissioner,
was sent to West Africa by his Government to enquire into and report
upon the progress of German commerce in those latitudes. He was
despatched at a time when the English Government had completed their
leisurely deliberations upon the appeal of the peoples of Togoland and
the Cameroons to be taken under the protection of the British flag, and
Mr. Hewitt, a British Consul, was voyaging to the Gulf of Guinea for the
purpose of complying with the native request, when Nachtigal arrived
there on his commercial mission. The German Commissioner, acting under
instructions from the Imperial Chancellor, hastily unfurled the flag of
the Fatherland at Lome, in Togoland, and succeeded in reaching Duala,
and formally placing the Cameroons under German rule, before Hewitt
arrived upon the scene. Lord Granville addressed a reproof to Bismarck
for not having divulged the nature of the errand upon which Nachtigal
had been sent, and the incident was closed. In the three decades that
followed, the German administrators in Togoland, with the thoroughness
with which the Teuton is gifted, taught the natives the “sharp lesson”
considered necessary to prepare them for the reception of Germany’s
civilising rule, furnished the colony with 200 miles of railway, over
750 miles of excellent roads of native construction, a score of postal
and telegraph stations, and a telephone system, and established a
wireless station--the most powerful in the world outside Europe--which
was not only in communication with Berlin, 3,450 miles distant, but with
East Africa, the Cameroons and South-West Africa. The final
installations at Kamina were completed in June, 1914; in August the
German operators learnt by wireless that Great Britain had declared war
on Germany; and on 26th August the Kamina Station notified Berlin that
the colony of Togoland, the smallest, completest, and only financially
independent German possession, had capitulated to an Anglo-French force.

The German annexation of South-West Africa was a more intolerably
humiliating and provocative act of aggression; it is one that only
now--after the territory has been recovered by the brilliant campaign of
the Union Army under General Louis Botha--can be forgiven Lord
Granville. Prior to 1883 the natives of Damaraland and Namaqualand,
suspicious of the intentions of Germany, had petitioned to be taken
under British protection. Downing Street experienced a temporary
uneasiness, but Bismarck’s assurance that Germany had no intention of
establishing Crown colonies in Africa, extinguished the fleeting
distrust. The Cape Colony was not so easily satisfied. A British
Commissioner, who was appointed to confer with the native chiefs,
reported favourably upon the proposal to officially confirm the
authority of the Cape Government over the region extending northward
from the Orange River to Portuguese Angoland. Sir Bartle Frere, the
Governor of Cape Colony, urged upon the home Government the desirability
of the step, and the Colonial Office decided upon the formal acquisition
of the port at Walfisch Bay. Bismarck, hesitating to commit what might
be construed as a deliberately hostile act, invited Great Britain to
state her intentions with regard to the rest of the south-west
territory, but failing to receive any definite reply, he decided upon
bold if impudent measures, and in April, 1884, the Chancellor announced
that the territory north of the Orange River was under the protection of
the German Empire. As Bryden says, in his _History of South Africa_,
“it was an unfriendly act, carried out in an unpleasant manner, and the
British Colonists in South Africa are not soon likely to allow it to
pass out of remembrance.” It not only destroyed the symmetry of a
British South Africa, and gave Germany rights in territories marching
with British colonies, but it added 322,450 square miles of African
territory to the German Colonial Empire, for which a Bremen merchant
named Luderitz parted with a hundred pounds and a score of old muskets.

Germany’s method of developing her new possession in South-West Africa
was entirely in keeping with her manner of acquiring it. From the first
she proceeded to colonise on military lines. Railways were constructed
with regard to their strategic importance; they were made on what is
still called the Cape gauge; and were directed towards the Union border.
A standing army was raised and compulsory service was instituted. An
artillery depot established at Windhoek, the capital, contained a
worthless collection of old gun-carriages and bales of locally-collected
hay. This was to secure the colony against the imaginary evil intentions
of the inoffensive and unarmed Ovambos, who inhabit the north-east
corner of the colony. At Keetmanshoop, some hundreds of miles further
from Amboland, but within 150 miles of Cape territory, was a great
arsenal, furnished with guns and shells, rifles and cartridges,
ambulances, transport vehicles, and military stores and supplies
sufficient to equip and maintain an army of fifteen thousand men for two
years. In the face of these facts and figures, we may be forgiven for
doubting the honesty of the German Colonial Secretary’s denial that
Germany ever had any intention of occupying, either permanently or
temporarily, the territory of the South African Union, and of
disregarding the expression of Lord Haldane’s pious belief that the
Kaiser’s life’s purpose was “to make the world better,” and that in
Germany’s method of colonial expansion, “she was penetrating everywhere
to the profit of mankind.”

In some ways the story of Germany’s annexation of the Cameroon
provinces, and her subsequent extension of that area, is the most
interesting of all, because if she secured her footing in East Africa by
subterfuge, and in South-West Africa by the exercise of sharp practice
supplemented by a certain display of bold decision, she edged her way
into the Gulf of Guinea by virtue of no other quality than that of
sheer bluff, but, having consolidated herself in the positions she had
thus gained in West Africa, she allowed the world to understand that she
was determined to expand her sphere of influence, if necessary, by
recourse to arms. In 1885 Germany legalised her occupation of the
Cameroons by placating France with an exchange of unimportant
territories, and renouncing in favour of Britain her nominal claims to
St. Lucia and to Forcados, at the mouth of the Niger River.

Having thus solidified their position, and secured themselves against
what Passarge calls “the intrigues and provocations of the English,” the
German administrators proceeded to Germanize their new province and
systematically to develop its tropical resources. Although they
established customs houses, courts of justice and post-offices, and
constructed about 125 miles of a projected railway system of 285 miles,
and, between 1898 and 1911, increased the total trade of the colony by
nearly forty million marks, the colony did not prove a departmental or
material success. The staffs of the Experimental Institute of
Agriculture at Victoria and the Department of Agriculture at Buea,
devoted their energies to the scientific raising of tropical economic
plants, to experiments in plantation culture, and to the training of
young natives in the virtues of Teutonic industry and organisation,
while, by Government Proclamation, all native children were compelled to
attend the Government schools, acquire an intelligent knowledge of the
language and history of Germany, and practice the art of singing German
patriotic songs. Despite this paternal concern for the agricultural and
educational well-being of the natives, the application of German methods
proved a disappointment. The children at the end of their school course
considered themselves too superior to undertake manual labour, while the
men, resenting the German indifference to their national feeling and
inherited methods of work, developed the spirit of native unrest. A lack
of sympathetic understanding of the natives was attended by culpably
injudicious treatment of them by the German officials, and the relations
between the authorities and the aborigines led to the frequent
employment of the Imperial troops, while the inadequacy of means of
internal communication rendered the progress of “one of the most
productive countries in the world” both slow and difficult.

But, disappointing and costly as was the German failure to administer
and develop the Cameroons, the Teutonic lust for territory was unabated,
and, in its resolve to extend its holding in this quarter of the globe,
the Government did not hesitate to emperil the peace of Europe. When the
German cruiser _Panther_ appeared at Agadir, in July, 1911, the object
of the Wilhelmstrasse was not to protect purely imaginary German
interests in that part of Morocco, but to maintain a menacing attitude
that would compel the French to cede to the Bully of Europe their
territory to the south of the German Cameroons. The negotiations for the
transfer were concluded in June, 1913, and fifteen months later French
and British troops commenced a joint expedition to wrest from the German
authority, by military means, the province from which the former had
been ejected by diplomatic blackmail and the insistant rattle of the
sword in the scabbard.

It is instructive to recall the methods by which Germany acquired her
African possessions, if only for the partial answer it provides to the
question as to what the Allies intend to do with them. It is absolutely
certain that however the Allies agree to dispose of the four colonies in
question, they will never be restored to Germany, notwithstanding the
fact that Herr Dernburg has committed the Emperor to the pledge that he
will never consent to make peace except on terms which include their
surrender. Germany got into Africa as a burglar effects an entrance into
a well-stored building, but it is not because her gains were ill-gotten
that she will be deprived of them. Having experimented in the
civilisation of natives for three decades, she has revealed an utter
inability to colonise for the benefit of mankind, but the hopeless
failure of the German system of imposing her rule upon subject races, is
not the reason why she will henceforth be debarred from participation in
the work of civilising the world. The colonial possessions of Germany,
as well as of England, France and Belgium, form part of the stakes for
which all Europe is in arms, and they will become the spoils of the
conquerors. As the Imperial Chancellor has announced, the future of the
Cameroons will be decided not in West Africa, but in another theatre of
war.

Germany’s explanation of her desire to acquire colonies was based upon
her need for extra territory capable of supporting her growing
population. For this purpose she acquired East Africa, and immediately
set about the task of raising, equipping and drilling a large force of
black troops. She seized the French Cameroons, and at once increased the
handful of natives which the French had found sufficient for the
maintenance of order in the colony, to an army of 1,550 black and 185
white troops, and she had planned the formation of additional corps of
mounted infantry, and the rearming of all the troops with modern rifles.
As soon as wireless telegraphy became a practical means of
communication, a wireless station was installed in Togoland which
rendered the little colony of inestimable potential value from a
military point of view, while in South-West Africa, the extent and
completeness of her defensive and offensive preparations, is abundant
proof that the real value to Germany of this territory lay in the
proximity of the region to the Boer States, disaffected to Great
Britain. “The land was not taken for _bona fide_ colonisation,” wrote
the Rev. William Greswell over thirty years ago, “only as a _point
d’appui_.” Germany pushed forward her military preparations in East,
West and South Africa, as she did in Prussia, because she had convinced
herself of England’s ultimate inability to hold India, Egypt and her
colonial dominions. Her professors assured the Kaiser and his junker
parasites, that the English had lost both “the qualities of creative
genius in religion and the valour in arms of a military caste”, that we
had become “a timorous, craven nation, trusting to its fleet”; and that,
while we had “failed to impress our dominion” on the chiefs of the
Indian Tributary States, the colonies were “shivering with impatience
under the last slight remnant of the English yoke.”

Because of their arrogant attempt to put their theories and their
conclusions to the test, the German people are being stripped of all
their overseas possessions. They have already lost their South-West
Protectorate and Togoland, and the Allies are now successfully engaged
in crushing German resistance in Eastern Africa. It is not my purpose in
this little book to follow the fortunes of the Allied troops; it will be
time enough to write the story of the campaigns when the task is
accomplished, and the future administrations of the colonies are in
operation. My object in the following pages is to give the public the
particulars about the Cameroons which I have collected not without the
expenditure of a considerable amount of time and trouble. A natural
desire to ascertain the nature of the difficulties that would have to be
surmounted by the allied forces, and a desire to learn something of the
natural resources and commercial potentialities of the territory that
was about to be acquired, sent me to bookshops and libraries in search
of works that would satisfy my curiosity. I was disappointed to find
that the information I wanted was not available in English form, English
authors having decided, apparently, that the colony did not lend itself
to interesting or marketable compilation, and since the British
Government had not accredited a Consul to the Cameroons, not even a
belated Consular Report was procurable. In this extremity I turned my
attention to such German publications as were obtainable in this country
and, from the official writings of Dr. Paul Rohrback, Dr. Grotefeld, Dr.
Paul Preuss, Dr. Walter Busse, Herr Eltester, and Siegfreid Passarge, I
gathered a mass of information concerning the geographical and
geological features, the vegetation and forestry, and the natives and
native cultivation, together with an interesting summary of the progress
made under the German system of development and the success they had
attained in their experiments in plantation cultivation. In a paper
written by Captain W. A. Nugent, R.A., who had been a member of the
Boundary Commission in 1907, and acted as British Commissioner
appointed to survey and fix the boundary between the German Cameroons
and Nigeria in 1912, I found a full and admirable description of the
territory traversed. This volume contains the result of my researches,
selected and arranged in such a manner as will, I trust, be found
acceptable to English readers who share my curiosity concerning the
natural resources, the commercial position and the prospects of the
colony, and who also entertain the hope that part of it, at least, will
ultimately form a link in the chain of British overseas dominions.

                                                    


The large bay or estuary in the Gulf of Guinea, lying south of Nigeria
and facing the island of Fernando-Po, was discovered by Portuguese
navigators in the fifteenth or sixteenth century and christened the Rio
dos Camaroes (the River of Prawns), from the abundance of Crustacea that
infested its waters. The name was also used to designate the
neighbouring mountains, which rise to the north-west of the bay. The
English usage, until the end of the nineteenth century, was to confine
the term, the Cameroons, to the mountain range, and to speak of the
estuary as the Cameroon River. It was left to the acquisitive Germans to
extend the use of the name in its Teutonic form--Kamerun--to the whole
Protectorate.

The establishment of German trading firms and factories at various
places on the West African coast suggested to the Imperial Chancellor
the practicability of laying the foundations of his projected German
Colonial Empire in the Cameroon region of the Dark Continent. On March
19th, 1884, Dr. Nachtigal, a former Consul at Tunis, was instructed to
proceed on this civilising mission, and on July 5th and 6th he hoisted
the German flag at Bayida and Lome, in Togoland. On the 10th of that
month the English gunboat _Goshawk_ entered the Cameroon River, and the
mission’s hope of further extending the sphere of German influence on
the coast of West Africa appeared doomed to extinction. But the
_Goshawk_ departed on the following day, leaving the field clear for
Nachtigal, who rushed through some agreements with the chiefs Deido,
Bell and Akva, declared the country to be under the protection of
Germany on July 14th, and appointed Doctor Buchner Provisional Governor
of the newly acquired territory. The new Governor acknowledged the
protest against German occupation, which was formally made by the
British Consul on July 19th, and proceeded to hoist the German flag at
Bumbia, Maliba, and Batanga.

In this nefarious and undignified manner the German Government obtained
a foothold in the Gulf of Guinea, but it still remained for them to
regulate their intrusion among the nations already established in the
region. In order to solidify the position they had taken up, and, in
the phrase employed by Siegfreid Passarge, “to withstand the intrigues
and provocations of the English,” who laid claims to Victoria and the
Rio del Rey coast, it was necessary to have the treaty of occupation
confirmed. On May 7th, 1885, a treaty was concluded by which the British
waived their claims in favour of Germany, who reciprocated by renouncing
their nominal claims to Forcados, at the mouth of the Niger, and to St.
Lucia. In the same year the French ceded Great Batanga and the island
west of Kwakwa-Kriek in exchange for the German possession of Konakry.
These treaties legalised the position, and Germany was left a free hand
to develop her possessions in the Cameroons, under the Governorship of
Baron von Goden.

In July, 1911, the German cruiser _Panther_ appeared off the coast of
Morocco, at Agadir, for the alleged purpose of protecting German
interests, of which no trace existed in that quarter of the globe. The
incident was ultimately closed by the cession to Germany of the French
territory to the south of their Cameroon colony, which was subsequently
incorporated with it under the name of New Cameroon. The transfer was
made in June, 1913. Under French domination, three military stations,
garrisoned with a total force of four officers, twelve non-commissioned
officers, and 200 native troops, had been sufficient to preserve order,
but the new rulers had their own ideas as to the military requirements
of their growing Empire. We read in _Jahrbuch über die Deutscher
Kolonien_ (1913) that the German defence force numbers 185 Europeans and
1,550 natives, while it was the intention of the Government to form an
additional corps of mounted infantry, to establish a stud farm for the
breeding of troop horses, and to arm all the troops with 98·3 carbines.
Since the declaration of war in August last, Togoland has capitulated to
the French and British, and the German Cameroons are now being
systematically and successfully invaded by the allied forces. The
political future of these territories is, as yet, undetermined, but
however they may be ultimately allocated, German domination in West
Africa, with its blundering mismanagement and bumptious militarism, is a
chapter of colonial history that is closed for ever.